Update docs for Terraform MCP server with telemetry details (#2324)
hashicorp/web-unified-docs: content/terraform-mcp-server/v0.5.x/docs/mcp-server/telemetry.mdx

---
page_title: Telemetry details for the MCP server
description: Learn about how the metrics are generated and collected for the Terraform MCP server.
---

> # Telemetry

Reviewer: Per my comment on the nav file, let's add this information to the reference.mdx instead of creating a new topic. I'll add comments to this file about content.

> Telemetry in terraform-mcp-server is implemented with OpenTelemetry metrics and is enabled only when OTEL_METRICS_ENABLED=true. In HTTP mode, the server creates an OTel meter provider, exports metrics over OTLP/HTTP to OTEL_METRICS_ENDPOINT, and flushes them on the interval set by OTEL_METRICS_EXPORT_INTERVAL. The service identity is added through OTEL_METRICS_SERVICE_NAME and OTEL_METRICS_SERVICE_VERSION.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Terraform MCP server uses OpenTelemetry to collect telemetry metrics. Set the `OTEL_METRICS_ENABLED` environment variable to `true` to enable metrics. In HTTP mode, the server implements the following lifecycle:

1. Creates an OTel meter provider 
1. Exports metrics over `OTLP/HTTP` to `OTEL_METRICS_ENDPOINT` 
1. Flushes the metrics according to the interval set by `OTEL_METRICS_EXPORT_INTERVAL` 
1. Adds the service identity is `OTEL_METRICS_SERVICE_NAME` and `OTEL_METRICS_SERVICE_VERSION`

Terraform MCP server generates the metrics and exports them to the configured OTLP endpoint. A remote instance of the server can then either receive or forward the telemetry to Datadog through its own collector or forwarding setup. This repo produces OTel metrics, but the remote repo is responsible for routing them to Datadog.
```
Right? We are describing a lifecycle?

Now that I'm looking a little more closely at this information, this is how I think we should organize this information:

1. Move this paragraph to the deploy.mdx file with `## Enable telemetry` as the heading
1. Move the rest of the content on this page to the reference.mdx file with `## Telemetry metrics` as the heading.
1. Link to the reference page from the deployment page.

Author: Done. Not sure how to do 3. (Link to the reference page from the deployment page.) Is there an example?

Author: Ok I found an example and added it.

## Two kinds of metrics are collected. 
First, standard HTTP server metrics are added by wrapping the HTTP mux with otelhttp.NewHandler(...). This emits:

http.server.request.body.size
http.server.response.body.size
http.server.request.duration

Second, the MCP server records custom tool metrics around tool execution using MCP hooks (BeforeCallTool / AfterCallTool). These emit:

mcp_tool_calls_total
mcp_tool_errors_total

> mcp_tool_duration_seconds

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Telemetry metrics

When enabled, Terraform MCP server collects the following metrics:

| Type | Emitted metrics | Notes |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Standard HTTP server metrics |  <ul><li>`http.server.request.body.size`</li><li>`http.server.response.body.size`</li><li>`http.server.request.duration`</li></ul> |  The server wraps the HTTP mux with `otelhttp.NewHandler(...)` to emit the metrics. |
| Custom tool metrics | <li>`mcp_tool_calls_total`</li><li>`mcp_tool_errors_total`</li><li>`mcp_tool_duration_seconds`</li></ul> |  The server uses MCP hooks to call the `BeforeCallTool` and `AfterCallTool` tools, which emit the metrics.  |
```
It might matter to users how the data is collected per the third column, but I wonder if we even need the first column?

Author: Done. You mean if we need the third column?

## How the data flows 

terraform-mcp-server generates the metrics, exports them to the configured OTLP endpoint, and terraform-mcp-server-remote can then receive or forward that telemetry to Datadog through its own collector/forwarding setup. In short: this repo produces OTel metrics; the remote repo is responsible for routing them to Datadog.

## Important scope note

> This metrics setup is currently tied to the streamable HTTP server path. It is not the default stdio path.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You must use the streamable HTTP server path to collect metrics. Streaming metrics is not supported on the default stdio path.
```
Is that what we mean?

Author: Yes. Done
